---
layout: post
title:  "Gravy 101"
date:   2016-11-24 17:30:00

---
# Gravy 101

Gravy can take many forms.  It's one of the simplest dishes at the table, but it can go a long way toward bringing dishes together.  The recipe below made about 2 quarts of gravy, and was plenty for a crowd of ~20.

# Tools

* large sauce pan (rounded inner edges are helpful - your whisk should be able to get to all portions)
* a good whisk
* fork for tasting the roux
* small spoon for tasting the gravy

# Ingredients

* All the drippings your turkey can ooze:  Separate broth from fat

The Roux: 

* 1 cup white all-purpose flour 
* 1 cup fat drippings (make up lack with butter)

**Scaling: 1 tbsp flour : 1 tbsp fat : 1 cup liquid**

The Rest: 
* ~ 1 cup cream
* ~ 6 cups broth drippings (including crispies & tasty solids).  Make up the difference with boxed chicken stock or reconstituted "Better than Boullion"
* 1-2 cups browned stuffing
* pepper, salt, spices as desired

# Preparation

Have all ingredients prepared and within easy reach, because **once you begin, you must never leave the pan** until the gravy has been removed from heat.

Heat fat in a large saucepan over medium high heat.  Add the flour and begin whisking.  Continually whisk the roux as it cooks, paying attention to the corners and base of the saucepan - it's important that the roux cook evenly, and not overbrown in portions.

Pay attention to the color, smell, and consistency of the roux.  You should also occasionally taste it with your fork to understand what's happening.  It will start with a light color and consistency of pancake batter.  If it's thicker than this, add a bit more fat.  If it's a bit thinner, don't worry - a little extra fat just means a little extra flavor.  During this phase, it will smell mostly of fat and flour.

After a couple of minutes, the roux will begin to get a bit fluffy, like marshmallow paste.  After another minute or two, it will begin to get silky - at this point, reduce the heat a bit.  The scent will become nutty and the color will begin shifting to pinkish brown.  I usually aim for the color of cappuccino foam.  The more you cook the roux, the less thickening power it will have.

When the roux is beautiful and pleasing to your eyes and nose, add in about two cups of your liquid, whisking vigorously.  This will be dramatic - your pan has a lot of heat to transfer to the liquid.  It will become thick rather rapidly.  Whisk it for 10-20 seconds until its consistency is smooth, then add another two cups of liquid.  Again, whisk until the consistency is even, and then add the remaining liquid.  

You'll need to taste the gravy to get the salt and spice balance right - when using drippings, the flavor profile can vary a lot, and your job is to balance out the flavor. Salt well, but try to avoid oversalting.  If you go too far with the salt, adding a bit extra cream can take the edge off.

At this point, continue stirring and heat the gravy until bubbles begin to pop up - just shy of a boil.  Then remove the gravy from heat.  Stir in the browned stuffing and any other delicious crispies you've decided to add.  

After a bit of time to cool, transfer the gravy to a good serving pitcher or bowl.  Once in the serving vessel, a good rule of thumb is to serve the gravy a little thinner than you want it to be on the plate, so feel free to add a bit more broth or cream to thin it a touch.